+++
title = "Remembering Jo sensei"
date = 2024-07-27
description = "A post in honor of a dear mentor who earnestly believed in her students."
[extra]
featured = true
short_title = "Jo sensei"
+++

A week ago, I was deeply saddened to learn the passing of my dear
mentor Yoshiko Jo, commonly referred to as Jo sensei, who was a Senior
Lecturer in Swarthmore College's Japanese department. Swarthmore
College wrote a [rememberance
post](https://www.swarthmore.edu/news-events/honor-senior-lecturer-japanese-yoshiko-jo),
but I also wanted to share how much of a wonderful mentor she was, and
how she made a lasting impact on me. My original text for this post is
written in Japanese, which you can find at the bottom of this post.

Jo sensei always brought a warm and energetic energy everywhere she
went. Even though I never got to take her classes, my friends always
told me about how much fun they were having in Jo sensei's second year
Japanese class, or in her Japanese reading class. As for me, I mainly
got to know Jo sensei through volunteering for the Japanese department
and being the co-president of Kizuna (Swarthmore's Japanese cultural
club). Jo sensei was also like a family friend to me given some close
ties to my relatives.

I have many memories with Jo sensei, but a special memory was from
last summer (2023). As I also say in some other posts, grad school is
a difficult time for everyone. But, the summer of 2023 was when I was
feeling that "difficult time" the most (so far, but fingers crossed).
I decided to visit Swarthmore to ask my mentors for advice and
encouragement. When I contacted Jo sensei, she kindly invited me to
her home for dinner.

<!-- The difficulties of grad school made me quite literally feel like
I became an empty shell of my former self. -->

Jo sensei greeted me with her big smile and energetic voice as usual.
What I thought would be a short dinner turned into a five hour
conversation along with some of the tastiest salad I've ever had in my
life (along with other lovely dishes), cupcakes, lots of laughter,
some crying, and generally so much warmth. I remember feeling so much
joy at our dinner that I just hadn't felt in a really long time. We
talked about fun topics like Jo sensei's exciting travel plans, or her
cooking recommendations, but she also listened to me very sincerely
when I opened up to her about my grad school struggles. She also
offered her opinions and advice, which I am very grateful for.

A part of our conversation that struck me deeply was when I shared
with Jo sensei that I feel like I've lost hope in myself, that the
glimmer and excitement that I felt when I first started grad school
was completely gone. Upon hearing this, Jo sensei paused, and then
very clearly told me that the glimmer is still there. She firmly said
that the glimmer may be a bit dimmer at the moment, but it's
definitely still there, you're working through it, and things will be
ok. At the time, I couldn't fully believe her words, but I felt the
a bit of the weight being lifted off my shoulders.


原文 (Original Text)

７月２０日に、スワスモア大学でお世話になっていた城佳子（じょう　よしこ）先生が亡くなりました。彼女の授業を直接取りませんでしたが、日本語学科のボランティアをしていたこともあり、当時会長をしていた絆というクラブだったり、私の親戚のご縁だったり、いろんな線を通してとてもお世話になっていました。

じょう先生は、本当に太陽のように暖かく、元気な人でした。とっても素敵なじょう先生という人の話をしたくて、ブログという形で話してよいのか、とかもよくわからなくなりながらも想いを綴ることにしました。少し修正するかもしれませんが、多少下手な日本語は見逃してもらえると助かります。

じょう先生を思い出すエピソードはそれはまた山のようにありますが、一つ自分の中でとても強く覚えている思い出について話したいと思います。去年（２０２３年）の夏、私は大学院のプレッシャーや、過労からかなりのスランプ、というか、うつ病に近い状況になってしまって、一時的に大学院を休み、実家へ帰ってました。毎日、自分がもう空っぽで、ろくでもない、っていう風に思ってしまっていました。人にメールを書くのも大変、人と話をするのも大変、そんな毎日でした。でもスワスモアの先生方とならお話できるかな、って思って数日間スワスモアへ訪問することにしました。そこで、じょう先生へ声をかけたら、ぜひ夜ご飯を食べに来てください、と招いてくれました。

じょう先生はいつものように、元気な笑顔と、ハキハキとした声で私を迎えてくれました。気づいたら、私も元気な気持ちになってきて、いろんな話をしていたらなんと５時間近く話し込んでました。その夏、そんなに長い間一緒にお話できたのは、じょう先生が初めてでした。美味しいご飯の作り方とか、先生が計画していたハワイ旅行や、いろんな楽しい話もしましたが、私の大学院でしてきた辛い思いや、葛藤についてもじょう先生はとても真剣に聞いてくれました。特に覚えているのが、私が密かにすごく気にしていたことについて話したことでした。私はじょう先生に「大学院に入りたてのころの私は、これからする研究とか、大学院生活とか、そんなものにいっぱい希望を持ちながら、キラキラとした目をしていたはずなのに、今は私はキラキラを一つも感じない。これから入る新入生を想像すると、キラキラとした目をしているんだろうな、って思って、それが羨ましくて、同時にそう思う自分がとても哀れでたまらない」というような話をしました。そうしたら、じょう先生は少し考えてから、きっぱりと、「あやかちゃんにもそのキラキラは残っている」って言ってくれました。今は少し見えにくいけど、そのキラキラは確かにそこにあるから、大丈夫、とはっきりと言ってもらえて、当時は完璧には信じられなかったけど、少し救われた気持ちになりました。もちろん、そのキラキラの話だけではなく、じょう先生の中の私についての思い出を教えてもらいながらいろんな励ましの言葉をもらいましたが、じょう先生がくれたエールは、今でも私の大事な一部です。いろんなスワスモアの教授から励ましや、復帰へのアドバイスをもらいましたが、じょう先生の言葉は本当に特別で、あの時ギリギリでもじょう先生に声をかけてよかった、じょう先生に会えて、話をしてもらって、本当によかったと思ったことは今でも覚えています。

何がいいたいのかと言うと、私が私を一番信じられなかった時に、私のことを私以上に信じてくれていたじょう先生が、はっきりとその思いを、応援を伝えてくれたことが、ありがたく思えてたまりません。

あの後、結局私は大学院へ無事復帰でき、大変な思いもしましたが状況や心向きを変えることができました。新たな担当教授や、ラボメンに出会えて、完璧にとは言いませんが、昔のキラキラが少し戻ってきたような気がします。今年の夏は、念願のコンピューターサイエンスの臨時教員の役目も努めていて、忙しくしながらも毎日をとても楽しく過ごせています。結局私は、私が思っていたろくでなしや空っぽな人間ではなく、じょう先生が覚えている私だったと、少しずつ思える日々がやってきました。これも、あの時じょう先生がかけてくれた言葉のお陰です。

私はこれからもコンピューターサイエンスの教員・教授の夢へと進んでいきますが、その中でもじょう先生のように、生徒のことを信じれて、大事な励ましを伝えられる教員になりたいと思います。

じょう先生と思い出話をしたり、「どうにかなりましたよーーーー」ってこの一年の話を詳しく教えたり、先生としてのアドバイスを聞いたり、もうできないことがとてもとても寂しいです。でも、じょう先生に出会えて、じょう先生から暖かい言葉をたくさんもらって、信じてもらえて、本当によかったです。これは全部、これからも私の大切な思い出です。本当にありがとうございました。

謹んでお悔やみを申し上げます。
