+++
title = "2024 CRA-WP Grad Cohort for Women Report"
date = 2024-05-13
description = "Fourth-year grad student attends grad-school-meta-event to gain wisdom and make friends."
[extra]
featured = true
short_title = "CRA-WP Grad Cohort"
+++

On April 11-13th, I attended [CRA-WP](https://cra.org/cra-wp/)'s [Grad
Cohort Workshop for
Women](https://cra.org/cra-wp/grad-cohort-for-women/), co-located with
the [Grad Cohort Workshop for IDEALS (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity,
Accessibility, and Leadership
Skills)](https://cra.org/cra-wp/grad-cohort-ideals/). This was a great
opportunity to meet wonderful computing researchers in both academia
and industry. Most importantly, this was a chance to talk with
researchers *outside* my graduate program about *meta*-grad-school
topics, such as soft skills. (Usually when you meet researchers
outside of your program, it's at a technical conference, and you talk
about cool research)

If you are a grad student (MS or PhD) looking for opportunities to get
grad school advice and meet cool computing researchers (grad students,
faculty, industry researchers) outside of your sub-field of
computing-related research, this is a great one! I hope this post
encourages you to apply to the next cycle of either the Grad Cohort
for Women or the Grad Cohort for IDEALS :)

## What is the CRA-WP Grad Cohort for Women?

The [CRA-WP](https://cra.org/cra-wp/) is a committee within the CRA
(Computing Research Association) that aims to increase participation
in computing research from underrepresented populations. You can read
more about their goals [here](https://cra.org/cra-wp/mission/).

The Grad Cohort for Women is a 2-3 day workshop that focuses on grad
school survival skills, especially how to navigate difficult spaces as
a woman in CS. There are panel talks, where researchers share their
experiences and perspectives on publishing papers, work-life balance,
navigating difficult interactions, figuring out career paths,
internship search, prepping your candidacy exam, and many more. There
are also 1-1 short advising sessions where you can meet with senior
researchers to ask for general advice, or have them take a look at
your Resume/CV. And of course, there are also plenty of opportunities
for informal discussions through lunches/dinners/other social events.
Both researchers in academia and industry attend, so that you can gain
perspectives from both ends of the spectrum.

## Why did I apply/attend?

I first heard about the workshop from Professor [Vasanta
Chaganti](https://www.cs.swarthmore.edu/~chaganti/), one of my
wonderful mentors at Swarthmore. Last summer, as I was going through
an especially tough time in my PhD, Vasanta recommended me to join
groups such as the CRA-WP. She emphasized the importance of having a
strong academic support system, and getting advice from many different
people. These points were very compelling to me.

A couple of months after hearing about CRA-WP, I made a big switch in
my research directions. I already felt that attending the workshop and
getting advice would be really helpful... But now I felt even more of
a need to gain wisdom from senior researchers and expand my support
group, so I can succeed at my new research.

Lastly, I thought it'll be good to leave the Ithaca bubble for a
couple of days. As much as I love all the nature in Ithaca and my
friends, I haven't travelled long distance in a long while. Also, it's
often said that travelling for conferences is one of the biggest perks
of being an academic :)

## What was it like?

The workshop spanned across three days. The first day had a welcome
reception, the second day was the main event, and the third day was
half talks and half 1-1 meetings. The organizers posted a specific
schedule on the [event
website](https://web.cvent.com/event/af32de64-9853-4aff-a0c9-b0dc590dd1e8/summary),
which can still be accessed.

I firmly believe that the gems hiding in every conference are the 1-1,
or small group interactions. To that end, I definitely met my goal of
meeting a lot of wonderful people! From assigning me a hotel roommate
and encouraging people to rideshare from the airport, to setting up
discussion groups during lunch, the workshop gave me plenty of
opportunities to meet new people. <!-- Moreover, everyone that I
talked to was very friendly and nice. --> Surprisingly, I found a mix
between early- and late-stage graduate students within the attendees
(note: MS students are also eligible for this workshop. If you're an
MS student looking to decide whether to continue to a PhD, this
workshop may be helpful since you can hear about current PhD students'
experiences). Given the nature of the workshop, I really thought that
most of the attendees would be early-stage PhD students, so this was a
pleasant surprise.

Even more surprisingly, the majority of people that I met were those
that I don't think I would've met otherwise. Most of the folks were
working on research outside of my areas, as I only met a handful of
researchers working in Programming Languages, Software Engineering, or
Computer Architecture. While it may have been nice to meet more people
to have technical discussions with, I think the purpose of the
workshop was more to have more general conversations about
research/grad school life. Plus, there are often more opportunities to
meet people who work on your area of research, by way of technical
conferences. As an aside, LinkedIn's (maybe new) QR-code functionality
made it *extremely* easy to connect with people :)

I also want to highlight the talks, which were given by professors and
experienced researchers in industry, and touched on many common grad
school themes: finding research topics, work-life balance, submitting
papers, and more. I really appreciated the panel on ["Strategies for
Human-Human
Interaction"](https://cra.org/cra-wp/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2024/04/CRA-WP-2024-Strategies-for-Human-Human-Interaction.pptx.pdf)
by [Cynthia
Phillips](https://www.sandia.gov/ccr/staff/cynthia-ann-phillips/),
[Kathryn McKinley](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/mckinley/), [Joyce
Croft](https://www.linkedin.com/in/joycecroft/), and [Shiva
Darian](https://smdarian.github.io/), which focused on how to navigate
difficult spaces/interactions as part of an underrepresented group in
computing. My favorite talk was the third day's talk on ["Storytelling
For Powerful
Communication"](https://cra.org/cra-wp/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2024/04/PPT-Storytelling-for-Powerful-Communicatio-M.Zohn_.pptx.pdf)
by [Margie Zohn](https://zohncoaching.com/) which focused on how to tell a
general story. I learned that it's helpful to do toungue-twisters
before giving a talk so you focus on dictation, and using present
tense lets the audience "experience" the story better, among other
things. Storytelling also shows up in many places within CS research
and academia: paper writing, job interviews, teaching, etc.

<!-- The main event day's late afternoon consisted of poster sessions,
which I signed up to present a poster about planned future work.
Presenters were grouped into groups of 5-6 based on research areas,
and we spent ~10 minutes (split between presentation and Q&A) on each
poster.

- Talks were helpful in remembering some meta-principles about grad school
- 1-1 interactions were the most fun part
- Poster presentations
- Favorite session was the storytelling one
-->

## Reflection & Takeaways

This workshop was a valuable experience to me mainly by being a *safe
space* to share grad school experiences with a wide range of people.
Personally, I think the fact that I was able to have deeper
conversations with people I just met was very special (though one
could argue that it's actually easier to share details with
strangers).

It's often said that everyone has a difficult time in grad school.
But, I find it hard to describe (in a nutshell) how difficult grad
school is because everyone's grad school experiences are so different.
Through this workshop, I was reminded that there are common *themes*
shared between our experiences. Despite coming from different
backgrounds (both as people and as researchers), there were many
subtle commonalities between our individual hopes, successes, and
struggles.

I was only able to come to this realization because people were
willing to share the experiences they had, and empathize with the
experiences I went through. I saw this willingness in a multi-hour
conversation I had with a new mentor, in people chiming in during the
Q&A portion of the Human-Human interaction panel, in lunch
discussions, hallway conversations I had with professors, and more.
When enough people talk about similar themes, be it multiple paper
rejections or difficulties with work-life balance or administrative
nightmares, I found that it brings a feeling of empowerment to the
room. And this feeling of empowerment, along with peoples' willingness
to be vulnerable, only existed because the workshop was a safe space.

Ultimately, I felt like I brought a lot of insecurities to this
workshop, and left many of them behind when I left. And for me, that
was a really big win.

That being said, I honestly wish I knew about this workshop earlier. A
lot of the advice I heard through the three days were not new, and
there were a lot of advice that Ayaka from a year ago would have
benefitted much more from. So, I think this workshop may be more
useful to early-stage grad students than late-stage students. That
being said, it's always better late than never! I still think I got
valuable experiences out of this workshop, and I'm really glad I went.

I'd like to say thank you to everyone who I met in those three days,
and to all of the organizers! It was a pleasure to meet you all and
share our grad school stories.

Lastly, if you are eligible and haven't been to Grad Cohort yet, I
hope this post encouraged you to apply!<!-- The Grad Cohort website
contains more information about the event, as well as slides from
previous events, so I recommend you check it out. -->

<!--
0. It's nice to have a space where you can be more vulnerable with people.
1. Sharing experiences is empowering
2. Making new friends is fun!
-->
